---
layout: distill
title: "Gateways 2021"
description: "Information on our work presented at Gateways 2021"
date: 2021-10-21

authors:
  - name: Alexander Michels
    url: "https://alexandermichels.github.io/"
    affiliations:
      name: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
---

## Towards Reproducible Research on CyberGISX with Lmod and Easybuild

I presented my work *Towards Reproducible Research on CyberGISX with Lmod and Easybuild* at the Gateways 2021 Conference. The work discussed how we utilized [Easybuild](https://docs.easybuild.io/) and [Lmod](https://lmod.readthedocs.io/) to enhance the reproduciblity and replicability of the CyberGIS Center's CyberGISX and CJW science gateways. The abstract can be seen below:

>JupyterHub [1] has become a popular choice in many scientific communities, offering an easy-to-use interface for users with little to no frontend development work while promoting reproducible and replicable (R&R) science [2]. In the broad geospatial science community, CyberGISX [3] provides such a gateway environment with many cyberGIS (i.e., geospatial information science and systems based on advanced cyberinfrastructure) and geospatial software packages prebuilt and ready to use. Like other JupyterHub-based solutions, CyberGISX also provides container-based access for its users and must balance a trade-off between providing a static compute environment which enhances R&R and continuously updating the software environment to keep up with advances in scientific software. Solutions such as Binder [4] have attempted to address this trade-off by having required dependencies encoded in the package and building the software environment at the time of use. However, such a solution comes with two major disadvantages: (a) software is built at the time it is needed, increasing startup time and introducing the possibility that some of the dependencies of the environment are no longer available or have changed; and (b) the onus of specifying and managing software installations is passed to notebook developers, many of whom are domain scientists and not comfortable with such responsibilities. 

>To address these challenges and enhance R&R with minimal effort from end-users, we have designed and implemented a solution on CyberGISX that allows software to be kept on an external file server mounted into each user’s environment. Scientific software is installed with Easybuild [5] and managed by Lmod [6] giving a variety of benefits: (1) the compute environment is more standardized and easily reproducible outside of the gateway; (2) multiple versions of software can be made available to users without increasing container size; and (3) the exact copies of software are always available on the gateway instead of being rebuilt for every release, further enhancing R&R. We also employ an Easybuild-installed Anaconda [7] to create and manage conda environments on the file server. The combination of the software stack from Easybuild and Python environment from conda provides end-users with kernels for their Jupyter notebooks which are persistent and unchanged as the gateway’s container updates. This design enhances R&R and adds functionality for advanced users without introducing technical barriers to non-technical end-users. As such, domain scientists using this solution need not build their own software and specify dependencies, which helps prevent the notebooks they have developed from getting broken by the next software release. This talk explores the new architecture and applications of this solution to CyberGISX [3] and CyberGIS-Jupyter for Water (CJW) [8].

To learn more:

* The abstract is in the conference proceedings [here](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5569659)
* Slides are available [here](/assets/pdf/Gateways2021-Michels-CyberGISXEasybuild.pdf)
* A recording of my live presentation [here]().

## Enabling Computationally Intensive Geospatial Research on CyberGIS-Jupyter with CyberGIS-Compute

We also had work accepted a recorded presentation entitled *Enabling Computationally Intensive Geospatial Research on CyberGIS-Jupyter with CyberGIS-Compute*. The abstract for that work is:

>Geospatial research and education have become increasingly dependent on cyberGIS, defined as geographic information science and systems based on advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI), [1] to tackle computation and data challenges. However, the use of advanced cyberGIS capabilities has typically been constrained to a small set of research groups who have the technical expertise of using CI resources. Over the past few years CyberGIS-Jupyter [2,3] has been developed to provide access to cyberGIS capabilities through an easy-to-use Jupyter Notebook interface which has made cyberGIS more accessible. For many cyberGIS and geospatial applications accessing CI resources needed for solving complex problems at scale. However, leveraging CI resources for geospatial application is challenging both due to the steep learning curve and lack of appropriate tools. CyberGIS-Compute fills this gap by providing an easy-to-use middleware tool for using and contributing geospatial application codes that leverage CI resources. This substantially lowers the learning curve for both geospatial users and developers to access cyberGIS capabilities at scale. CyberGIS-Compute is backed by Virtual ROGER (Resourcing Open Geospatial Education and Research); a geospatial supercomputer with access to a number of readily available popular geospatial libraries. With CyberGIS-Compute we have designed an easy-to-use middleware and associated Python SDK to provide access to CyberGIS capabilities, allowing geospatial applications to easily scale and employ advanced cyberinfrastructure resources. This presentation will first describe the basics of CyberGIS-Jupyter and CyberGIS-Compute, then introduce the Python SDK for CyberGIS-Compute with a simple example. Then, we will take multiple real-world geospatial applications use-cases like spatial accessibility and wildfire evacuation simulation using agent based modeling. Lastly, we will also descrive mechanism to contribute applications to the CyberGIS-Compute framework.

To learn more:

* You can [view the abstract here](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5569659)
* [Check out Dr. Padmanabhan's talk on YouTube](https://youtu.be/KJGBIx0MzWw)

The playlist with all of the Gateways 2021 talks can be found [here](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLTkmCX5R7siNrdUtgrn4ncEpmW9ZyJJff).